---
title: "Setting up Pi-hole with Wi-Fi AP on Manjaro ARM"
date: 2019-07-20
author: kotatsuyaki (Ming-Long Huang)
---

Since the beginning of this summer vacation, my old trusty Raspberry Pi 3 has been lying around doing nothing. Before that, it has been serving as a personal Wi-Fi hotspot in my dorm. Now that I have more free time (actually tons of them), I'd like to change the system to my beloved distro [Manjaro Linux](https://manjaro.org/) and add ad-blocking functionality to the hotspot.

# Installing Manjaro ARM

Installation of Manjaro on the Pi is pretty simple. Head to their [download page](https://manjaro.org/download/), click on the ARMv8 tab and download either LXQT or minimal image for the Raspberry Pi 3. If you're not afraid of terminal-only usage, I recommend the minimal one for simplicity. Use `dd bs=4M if=Manjaro-ARM-minimal-rpi3-19.06.img of=/dev/sdX conv=fsync` to write the image onto your micro SD card, then boot the device up. A text based setup tool will guide you to configure username, hostname and password.

<!-- more -->

# Setting up Pi-hole

Since Manjaro, along with other Arch-based distros, is not officially supported by Pi-hole, the [Archwiki comes to the rescue](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Pi-hole). Just install it from the AUR:

```bash
# Here I'm using yay as the AUR helper.
yay -S pi-hole-ftl pi-hole-server php-sqlite lighttpd php-cgi
```

The building process requires about 10+ minutes on the underpowered Raspberry Pi 3. Take a break during this time.

After the installation is done, stop the service `systemd-resolved` first then enable and start `pihole-FTL` using `systemctl`. Using a device under the same network to test the DNS server. It should be already blocking ads now.

# The web interface

There's a dedicated web interface for pi hole. It's optional, but it's a good tool to visualize the queries and log data. First we need to adjust settings of PHP. Find and uncomment these lines from `/etc/php/php.ini`:

```conf
extension=pdo_sqlite
extension=sockets
extension=sqlite3
```

Copy the default lighttpd config file provided by Pi-hole to the right place:

```bash
sudo cp /usr/share/pihole/configs/lighttpd.example.conf /etc/lighttpd/lighttpd.conf
```

Restart the `lighttpd` service, and the web dashboard should be up and working now.

# Setting up the AP

My ultimate goal is to use the Pi simultaneously as both ad-blocker **and** Wi-Fi access point, so we have to dig into this a little bit. Before i was using [create_ap](https://github.com/oblique/create_ap) to save time configuring all the things to make AP work (since highschool), but the AUR helper told me that there's a package conflict between `create_ap` and `pi-hole-ftl`. It turns out that since the 4<sup>th</sup> version of Pi-hole-FTL, they integrated a fork of `dnsmasq`[^1] in their project. Therefore, the solution is to install `hostapd` manually and make use of Pi-hole's built-in DHCP server (which can be enabled from the web interface) to assign IPs.

Install `hostapd` from the repos:

```bash
sudo pacman -S hostapd
```

Prevent `wlan0` from being managed by the DHCP client:

```bash
echo denyinterfaces wlan0 | sudo tee -a /etc/dhcpd.conf
```

Next, we should assign a static IP to the `wlan0` interface. To do this on distros with systemd, do the following:

```ini
# /etc/systemd/network/wlan0.network
[Match]
Name=wlan0

[Address]
Address=192.168.50.1/24
# This address has to match the one in pihole's DHCP settings page

[Network]
IPForward=ipv4
```

Also enable IPv4 forwarding on the ethernet interface:

```ini
# /etc/systemd/network/eth0.network
[Match]
Name=eth0

[Network]
IPForward=ipv4
IPMasquerade=yes
```

Configure IPTables. This part is taken from [this guide](https://qiita.com/mt08/items/ea3a5357c0c9c4ae121b).

```bash
# Change IPTables rules
sudo iptables -t nat -A POSTROUTING -o eth0 -j MASQUERADE
sudo iptables -A FORWARD -i eth0 -o wlan0 -m state --state RELATED,ESTABLISHED -j ACCEPT
sudo iptables -A FORWARD -i wlan0 -o eth0 -j ACCEPT

# Make them persistent after reboots
sudo bash -c "iptables-save > /etc/iptables.ipv4.nat"
echo "iptables-restore < /etc/iptables.ipv4.nat" | sudo tee /lib/dhcpcd/dhcpcd-hooks/70-ipv4-nat
```

Make a configuration file for hostapd:

```conf
# /etc/hostapd/hostapd.conf
interface=wlan0
driver=nl80211
hw_mode=g
channel=6
ieee80211n=1
wmm_enabled=1
ht_capab=[HT40][SHORT-GI-20][DSSS_CCK-40]
macaddr_acl=0
auth_algs=1
ignore_broadcase_ssid=0
wpa=2
wpa_key_mgmt=WPA-PSK
rsn_pairwise=CCMP

# Change these to your desired values.
# The password must contain more than 8 chars.
ssid=MyPiAP
wpa_passphrase=12345678
```

Enable the `hostapd` service and reboot. We now have a ad-blocking Wi-Fi AP. It's been roughly tested for 12 hours now and it's running flawlessly.

# Afterword

The Raspberry Pi 4 [is released](https://www.raspberrypi.org/blog/raspberry-pi-4-on-sale-now-from-35/) for about a month, with up to 4GB of memory and generally better hardware. I'm very tempted to buy one, but it's still not available in local stores...

[^1]: Further details on [what they've changed in their fork](https://docs.pi-hole.net/ftldns/dns-resolver/).
